---
title: "Test Driven Development"
date: 2021-02-11T22:23:20Z
summary: ""
type: "slides"
categories: ["slides"]
# TODO: add/remove tags before committing
tags: ["tdd"]
---

<!-- 
title slide (h1): #
other slides (h2): ##

!! prefer using multiple vertical slides over dense slides !!

vertical slides to expand on the concept
vertical separator: ___

horizontal slides to separate concepts
horizontal separator: ---
-->

## Test Driven Development

---

## Test Driven Development (TDD)

> Practice of writing tests before writing implementation.

___

### Source Code

- **implementation**: code that meets stakeholder requirements
- **testing**: code that verifies the implementation behaves according to stakeholder requirements

___

### Benefits of TDD

- Requires the developer to have a strong understanding of the task requirements.
- Promotes communication between developers and stakeholders.
- Reduces Regression

___

### Regression

> A change to existing implementation code that creates an adverse effect.

Regression can cripple a project, instead of working on new features you must spend time fixing issues within pre-existing implementation code.

---

## TDD Workflow

> Do note write production code until you have a failing test

TODO: RGR DIAGRAM

___

> Commonly referred to as the Red-Green-Refactor workflow:

1. Watch a test fail before making it pass
2. Write the most simple code possible to pass the test
3. Refactor code and ensure all tests continue to pass

___

### Step 1: Red

> Why should you write a failing test first?

This ensures the test has a valid fail state.

___

### Step 2: Green

> Why write the most simple code possible to pass the test?

This ensures the test has a valid pass state.

___

### Step 3: Refactor

> Refactor code and ensure all tests continue to pass

Once your test passes you can improve on the implementation with the knowledge that the tests will catch any regressions.

---

### What is Refactoring?

> Altering existing source code without changing it's expected behavior.

Refactoring can be done for reasons including:

- eliminate bugs
- optimize
- improve readability

___

### Why refactor?

> The first solution is not always the best

You can now refactor the implementation considering:

- optimization
- scalability
- readability
- **the best practices of your team**

---

## Long term benefits of TDD

- Test suite proves implementations meet stakeholder requirements
- Creates an environment of communicating with stakeholders early and often
- Testing First Philosophy that increases overall test coverage
- Tests serve as a living documentation of the implementation

<!-- slide content between < slides > and Notes: -->

Notes:

instructor notes below (not rendered in slides unless in presenter mode)
