---
title: "Test Driven Development"
date: 2021-02-11T22:23:20Z
summary: ""
categories: ["slides"]
# TODO: add/remove tags before committing
tags: [""]
---

<!-- 
title slide (h1): #
other slides (h2): ##

!! prefer using multiple vertical slides over dense slides !!

vertical slides to expand on the concept
vertical separator: ___

horizontal slides to separate concepts
horizontal separator: ---
-->

{{< slides >}}

## Test Driven Development

---

## Test Driven Development (TDD)

> Practice of writing tests before writing implementation.

___

### Source Code

- implementation: code that meets stakeholder requirements
- testing: code that verifies the implementation behaves the way the developers expect

___

### Immediate benefits of TDD

- Requires the developer to have a strong understanding of the task requirements.
- When a developer is unable to write tests it indicates they should re-engage in conversation with the product owner, or product stakeholders.

---

## TDD Workflow

1. Do note write production code until you have a failing test
1. Watch a test fail before making it pass
1. Write the most simple code possible to pass the test
1. Refactor code and ensure all tests continue to pass

> This is commonly referred to as the Red-Green-Refactor workflow.

___

### Why should you write a failing test first?

- To ensure the test has a valid fail state.

___

### Why write the most simple code possible to pass the test?

- To ensure the test has a valid pass state.

___

### What is Refactoring?

> Altering existing source code without changing it's expected behavior.

Refactoring can be done for any number of reasons including to:

- eliminate bugs
- optimize
- improve readability

___

### Why the refactor step?

- After proving a test both fails and passes as it should you can now refactor your code confidently with the knowledge that your test will catch failures.
- You can now refactor the implementation considering optimization, scalability, readability, or to any standards you need to hold your implementation to.

---

## Long term benefits of TDD

- Test suite proves implementations meet stakeholder requirements
- Creates an environment of communicating with stakeholders early and often
- Testing First Philosophy that increases overall test coverage
- Tests serve as a living documentation of the implementation

<!-- slide content between < slides > and Notes: -->

Notes:

instructor notes below (not rendered in slides unless in presenter mode)

{{< /slides >}}
