---
title: "Test Driven Development: URL Parser"
date: 2021-02-11T22:23:20Z
summary: ""
categories: ["exercises"]
# tags the topic
# TODO: add the tool-name and any other related tags before committing
tags: ["tdd", "j-unit", "unit-testing"]
---

## Tech Stack

| | |
| --- | --- |
| **Language** | Java |
| **Framework** | - |
| **Build Tool** | Gradle |
| **Testing Framework** | Junit 5 |
| **Database** | - |

## Setup

For this studio, you will create a class to represent URLs as Java objects. You will do this using a test-driven approach.

Fork and clone the [tdd-studio repository](https://gitlab.com/LaunchCodeTraining/tdd-studio).

Review terminology for the following URL components:

<!-- DISCUSS: decouple HTTP pre-req
i think i remember this ex confusing some students even after having a previous HTTP lesson
it isnt necessarily tied to HTTP as long as within the article the descriptions of each are described
- definitions / examples of each
- a simple diagram with the components of a URL
-->

- protocol
- domain
- path

{{% notice info %}}
You won't need to go very deep into URLs and you are more than welcome to use [Wikipedia for a breakdown on URLs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL).
{{% /notice %}}

## Scenario

Create two classes:

- `Url.java`
- `UrlTest.java`

<!-- 
CLARITY: note on file structure
should we encourage them to use the src/main and src/test structure?

{{% notice note %}}
Remember to create these files in their correct directories.
-->
{{% /notice %}}

You will follow a test-driven approach to implement the requirements below. This means that for each requirement, you should write a test before writing any code for that requirement.

Use the red-green-refactor workflow:

- Write a failing a test
- Write code to get the test to pass
- Review your code to see if it can be improved and rerun your tests after each refactor

### Requirements

- There should be only one `Url` constructor, and it should take a string (e.g. `"https://launchcode.org/learn"`) and set `domain`, `protocol`, and `path` fields. Note that protocol and domain will not contain any / characters, but the path may.
- The three should be immutable. In other words, they should be `final` and have getters but not setters.
- The constructor should take mixed-case strings, but set fields as lowercase strings. For example, if passed `"HTTPS://LAUNCHCODE.ORG"`then calling `getDomain()` should return `"launchcode.org"`.
- `Url` should override `toString()`, which should return a properly-formatted version of the URL (e.g. `"https://launchcode.org/learn"`)
- The string passed to the constructor should satisfy each of the following. If it doesn’t, then the constructor should throw an `IllegalArgumentException` with an appropriate message.
  - The `domain` and `protocol` must be present but the `path` is optional
  - The protocol is one of: `ftp`, `http`, `https`, or `file`
  - The domain may only contain letters, numbers and the following characters `.`, `-`, or `_`

{{% notice note %}}
These requirements are not comprehensive with how a URL may be structured, but they encompass a large number of URLs you use on a daily basis.
{{% /notice %}}

### Bonus

If you implement the above requirements with time to spare, attempt to implement these as well:

- Add port, query string, and fragment fields with reasonable validation for each
- Add support for IP addresses in addition to domains

{{% notice tip %}}
You may find these features simpler to implement using Regular Expressions. The [Java Regex Docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html) and [Regex101 (PCRE setting)](https://regex101.com) can be used to develop the expressions.
{{% /notice %}}
