---
title: "Integration Testing In Spring"
date: 2021-02-11T18:34:35Z
summary: ""
weight: 1
type: "slides"
categories: ["slides", "java"]
tags: ["integration-testing", "j-unit", "spring"]
---

<!-- 
title slide (h1): #
other slides (h2): ##

!! prefer using multiple vertical slides over dense slides !!

vertical slides to expand on the concept
vertical separator: ___

horizontal slides to separate concepts
horizontal separator: ---
-->

## Integration Testing In Spring

---

## Our Tools

> Spring and J-Unit work together to automate integration tests

- **J-Unit**: provides standard assertions, setup and teardown utilities
- **Spring**: provides tools for testing web servers

---

## J-Unit Utilities

> Setup and teardown utilities

You can use a common setup and teardown to run:

- before and after each test in the class
- before and after all tests within the test class

___

### Before & After Each Test

> Same setup and teardown **for each test** in the class.

**Only apply to object (instance) methods**!

```java
public class GetTodoTests {
  @BeforeEach
  public void setupEach() {
    // executes immediately before each test
  }
  @AfterEach
  public void teardownEach() {
    // executes immediately after each test
  }
}
```

___

### Before & After All Tests

> A common setup and teardown for **all tests** in the class.

These annotations **only apply to static methods**!

```java
public class GetTodoTests {
  @BeforeAll
  public static void setupAll() {
    // executes only once before all tests in the class
  }
  @AfterAll
  public static void teardownAll() {
    // executes only once after all tests in the class
  }
}
```

---

## Spring Testing With `MockMvc`

> The Spring test library provides `MockMvc` tools.

Spring Boot test starter dependency pre-configures common settings:

```sh
spring-boot-starter-test
```

---

### Spring `MockMvc` Tools

> Allows us to test real HTTP requests without needing a full web server like TomCat.

- `MockMvc`: The main object used for making HTTP requests.
- `MockMvcRequestBuilders`: Static methods for configuring the request.
- `MockMvcResultMatchers`: Static methods for assertions on the response.

Notes:

- `MockMvc` runs the dispatcher servlet in memory 
- Behaves like real HTTP requests without the overhead of the full web server

---

### Integration Test Configuration

> Several annotations are needed to enable integration tests with Spring.

We create a custom annotation `IntegrationTestConfig` which groups these for ease of use:

```java
@Transactional
@SpringBootTest
@AutoConfigureMockMvc
@Target(ElementType.TYPE)
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
public @interface IntegrationTestConfig {}
```

Notes:

- @Transactional: rolls back the test DB after every test suite
- @SpringBootTest: loads the Spring Context to register component classes
- @AutoConfigureMockMvc: configures the MockMvc object so it can be autowired
- @Target(ElementType.TYPE): annotation usage settings
- @Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME): annotation usage settings

___

### Using the `IntegrationTestConfig`

> Apply to every integration test that uses `MockMvc`.

The same as applying each annotation individually!

```java
@IntegrationTestConfig
public class GetTodoTests {
  // autowire the MockMvc object for use in tests    
  @Autowired
  MockMvc mockMvc;
...
}
```

---

## Using `MockMvc`

> `MockMvc` behaves like a client for making requests

Every request begins with the `perform()` method

- inside you configure the request using `MockMvcRequestBuilders`
- afterwards you perform assertions using `MockMvcResultMatchers`

___

### Example of using MockMVC

```java
mockMvc
  // performs a GET request to the /todos path
  .perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders.get("/todos"))
  // expects a 200 response status
  .andExpect(MockMvcResultMatchers.status(200))
```

---

## Configuring the Request

> The `MockMvcRequestBuilders` class exposes static methods for configuration.

- **required**: setting the path and method of the endpoint
- **optional**: setting the headers
- **optional**: setting the body

___

### Setting the Path

> The path can be a simple String or a URL template

The URL template Strings are just like the `RequestMapping` path variable syntax:

```java
// simple path corresponding to /todos/{todoId}
delete("/todos/1")

// using a URL template
delete("/todos/{todoId}", 1)
```

___

### Optional Configuration

> You can further specify the headers and body.

After setting the HTTP method and path you can **chain** other configuration details:

```java
// "performs" a GET request to the /todos path
mockMvc.perform(
  MockMvcRequestBuilders.get("/path")
    // individual headers
    .header("Header-Name", "header value")
    // shorthand for content-type header
    .contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
    // request body
    .content(jsonBody)
)
```

___

### Setting the Body

> All bodies must be serialized. In our case we are using JSON.

We use the Jackson `ObjectMapper` to serialize:

- simple objects using a `HashMap`
- custom objects **as long as the class has a serializer declared**

```java
// dataObject is any object that can be serialized to JSON
String jsonBody = new ObjectMapper().writeValueAsString(dataObject);
```

---

## Assertions of the Response

> The `MockMvcResultMatchers` class exposes static methods for response assertions.

You can assert any expectations about the response with `andExpect()`:

- status code
- headers
- body

___

### Multiple Assertions

Multiple `andExpect()` assertions can be chained together:

```java
mockMvc.perform(...)
  // assert the status code
  .andExpect(MockMvcResultMatchers.status(expectedStatus))
  // assert a header value
  .andExpect(MockMvcResultMatchers.header("Header-Name", expectedValue)))
  // assertions on JSON response body
  .andExpect(MockMvcResultMatchers.jsonPath(...))
...
```

---

## Assertions on JSON

> JSON can be evaluated using JMESPath syntax.

The `jsonPath()` method allows you to verify JSON String bodies:

- shape: Assertions on the key structure of the JSON.
- values: Assertions on the values of specific keys.

___

### Using `jsonPath`

> Assertions are made on the JMESPath result from `jsonPath()`.

The JMESPath query output is passed to the assertion:

```json
{ "id": 10, ... }
```

```java
// assert the shape
jsonPath("$.id").exists()
jsonPath("$.id").isNumber()
```

```java
// assert the value
jsonPath("$.id").value(10)
```

___

### Asserting Shapes

> Some common `jsonPath()` assertions on the shape:

These are superficial assertions on the structure of the JSON.

- `exists()` and `doesNotExist()`
- `isEmpty()` and `isNotEmpty()`
- `isX()` where `X` is the expected data type of the key

---

<!-- CLARITY: I would probably move JMESPath to its own slide deck. This current slide deck just needs to explain that it's possible not show the specifics of how it is done. -->

## JMESPath Basics

> JMESPath is a query language for JSON written as a string.

It allows us to evaluate JSON without having to deserialize it.

- `$`: is the root *node* (a JSON array or single object)
- `$.`: dot syntax is used to access properties of objects
- `$[]`: bracket syntax is used to index into arrays

___

### JMESPath For Objects

> If the response is a JSON object:

```json
{
  "a": {
    "b": {
      "c": [1, 2]
    }
  }
}
```

- `$`: refers to **the entire object**
- `$.b`: returns `{ "c": [1, 2] }`
- `$.b.c[0]`: returns `1`

___

### JMESPath For Arrays

> If the response is a JSON array:

```json
[
  { "a": "hello" },
  { "a": "world", "b": ["first", "second"] },
]
```

- `$`: refers to **the entire array**
- `$[].a`: returns an array of `a` values, `["hello", "world"]`
- `$[1].b[0]`: returns the value `first`
