---
title: "Integration Testing: Java Quiz"
date: 2021-02-11T18:34:35Z
summary: "Questions on integration testing with Spring and J-Unit"
categories: ["quizzes", "java"]
weight: 4
tags: ["integration-testing", "spring", "j-unit"]
---


## Spring Testing

> The `MockMvc` object is used to simulate HTTP requests to your server?

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

> When building a test request you would use the `MockMvcRequestBuilder` methods to configure (select all that apply)?

<!-- 
- request headers
- request body
- request method and path
-->

- request headers
- request body
- request status code
- response body
- request method and path
- response headers

> To perform an HTTP assertion you would use which method?

<!-- andExpect() -->

1. `andAssert()`
2. `andVerify()`
3. `andExpect()`
4. `andConfirm()`

> You can chain multiple assertions on a single `MockMvc` request.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

> If multiple assertions are made on a request they will be executed in the order they are written.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false
3. you may only have a single assertion per request

> All `MockMvc` request bodies must be serialized as strings.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

> What query language syntax is used to assert a JSON response body using `jsonPath()`?

<!-- JMESPath -->

1. JSONPath
2. JMESPath
3. JSONMatch
4. JSONAssert

## JSON Assertions

### Entities

Given the following response body:

```json
{
  "id": 1,
  "title": "Make Halloween plans",
  "tags": ["event", "holiday"]
}
```

> In the query `"$.tags` what does the `$` refer to?

<!-- the entire object -->

1. the `tags` array
2. the entire object
3. the first property of the object

> What is the result of the query `$.tags[1]`?

<!-- holiday -->

1. `"event"`
2. `["event", "holiday"]`
3. `"holiday"`
4. `1`

> What is the result of the query `$.id`?

<!-- 1 -->

1. `"Make Halloween Plans"`
2. `1`
3. `["event", "holiday"]`
4. `"event"`

### Collections

Given the following response body:

```json
[
  { "id": 1, "title": "Make Halloween plans" },
  { "id": 2, "title": "Finish costume" }
]
```

> In the query `"$[0]` what does the `$` refer to?

<!-- the entire array -->

1. the first object in the array
2. the entire array
3. the first property of each object in the array

> What is the result of the query `$[1]`?

<!-- { "id": 2, "title": "Finish costume" } -->

1. `{ "id": 2, "title": "Finish costume" }`
2. `[1, 2]`
3. `{ "id": 1, "title": "Make Halloween plans" }`
4. `1`

> What is the result of the query `$[0].id`?

<!-- 1 -->

1. `"Make Halloween Plans"`
2. `1`
3. `{ "id": 1, "title": "Make Halloween plans" }`
4. `2`

## Gradle

> What task do we use to execute integration tests?

<!-- test -->

- `test`
- `integration`
- `integration-test`
- `itest`

> What Gradle CLI option is used to pass environment variables (system properties) to the JVM running your application?

<!-- -D VARIABLE=VALUE -->

- `-D VARIABLE=VALUE`
- `-D VARIABLE:VALUE`
- `-E VARIABLE=VALUE`
- `-E VARIABLE:VALUE`

> You must include `systemProperties System.properties` within every Gradle task that relies on externally configured environment variables.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false
