---
title: "Test Driven Development: Range and Trip Meter"
date: 2021-02-11T22:23:20Z
summary: ""
categories: ["walkthroughs"]
# tags the topic
# TODO: add the tool-name and any other related tags before committing
tags: ["tdd", ""]
---

<!--
reference images using a relative path: ./images/image-name.ext
-->

{{% notice warning %}}
You may work ahead in the walkthrough. However, if you get stuck don't interrupt the walkthrough with questions that are ahead of the rest of the class.
{{% /notice %}}

## Tech Stack

| | |
| --- | --- |
| **Language** | Java |
| **Framework** | - |
| **Build Tool** | Gradle |
| **Testing Framework** | Junit 5 |
| **Database** | - |

## Setup

1. Clone the [car unit test repository](https://gitlab.com/LaunchCodeTraining/car-unit-tests).
1. Switch to the `unit-testing-solution` branch.
1. Create a new branch called `tdd`.

## Instructions

Workflow:

1. Discuss the requirements being added
2. Create a test list
3. Write tests
4. Make them pass
5. Refactor the code

### Discuss Requirements

Following TDD and the red-green-refactor workflow we need to understand our requirements before writing any code.

Today we will be implementing Range, and Trip Meter functionality.

The Range functionality will calculate how many more miles the car can drive before running out of gas. The output should be a Double representing the miles the car can drive before needing to fuel up.

The Trip Meter will be a separate resettable odometer. This will allow a user to track the number of miles travelled on a specific trip.

### Range Feature

#### Create a Test List

Based on the requirements we need to create three tests:

- testRangeOnInitialization - create a car and check range
- testRangeAfterDriving - drive a car and verify remaining range
- testRangeAfterAddingGas - verify the range after adding gas to the tank

#### Write the Tests

```java
@Test
public void testRangeOnInitialization() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    assertEquals(200, testCar.getRange());
}

@Test
public void testRangeAfterDriving() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    testCar.drive(100);
    assertEquals(100, testCar.getRange());
}

@Test
public void testRangeAfterAddingGas() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    testCar.drive(200);
    testCar.addGas(5.0);
    assertEquals(100, testCar.getRange());
}
```

What happens when you run the tests?

Compilation Error! We are calling some methods that don’t yet exist. We will need to create these methods to get our tests to run. Remember we want to see a failing red test before a successful green test.

##### Add Missing Methods

We need to add `getRange()` to `Car.java`.

```java
public double getRange() {
    return this.gasTankLevel;
}
```

After adding the code, run the tests again. Our tests should now run **and they should fail**.

#### Make our Tests Pass

Let's get our tests to pass:

```java
public double getRange() {
    return this.gasTankLevel * this.milesPerGallon;
}
```

Now we have introduced the proper logic that should return the correct range calculation. Let’s re-run those tests.

This time they are passing! In this case we don’t need to refactor. Our code is descriptive, efficient, and all of our tests are passing. Let’s move on.

### Trip Meter Feature

#### Create a Test List

Based on the requirements we need to create four tests:

- testInitialValue - create a car and verify initial trip value is 0
- testAfterDriving - drive a car and verify trip value is driven amount
- testResetAfterDriving - drive a car, reset trip, then verify trip is 0
- testResetThenDrive - drive, reset the trip, drive again, verify trip value is driven amount

#### Write the Tests

```java
@Test
public void testInitialValue() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    assertEquals(0, testCar.getTripMeter());
}

@Test
public void testAfterDriving() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    testCar.drive(50);
    assertEquals(50, testCar.getTripMeter());
}

@Test
public void testResetAfterDriving() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    testCar.drive(50);
    testCar.resetTripMeter();
    assertEquals(0, testCar.getTripMeter());
}

@Test
public void testResetThenDrive() {
    Car testCar = new Car("a", "a", 10, 20);
    testCar.drive(50);
    testCar.resetTripMeter();
    testCar.drive(25)
    assertEquals(25, testCar.getTripMeter());
}
```

What happens when you run the tests?

Compilation error!

##### Add Missing Methods

We will need to add some methods to our `Car.java` class:

```java
public double getTripMeter() {
    return 0;
}

public void resetTripMeter() {

}
```

These methods are lacking for now, but should get us past our compilation errors.

#### Make our Tests Pass

We need to add a property to `tripMeter` and then update the methods we just added: `getTripMeter()` and `resetTripMeter()` to `Car.java`.

Run the tests again. The should be passing now!

Do we need a refactor?