---
title: "JavaScript: Callback Functions"
date: 2021-03-01T19:16:32Z
summary: ""
categories: ["slides", "javascript"]
type: "slides"
tags: ["callbacks"]
---

## JavaScript Callback Functions

---

## What is a callback?

> A function that **another function invokes** as part of its procedure.

Using callbacks involves 2 functions:

- a `procedure` function
- a `callback` function

___

### The Procedure Function

<!-- CLARITY: you used the word "procedures" in the definition for procedure function can we replace it with function task, or function objective? -->

> Abstracts tedious or complex procedures.

The `procedure` varies by use case but will always:

- Receive the `callback` as an argument.
- Invoke the `callback` as a step in its internal logic.

___

### The Callback Function

> Bridges interaction between external code and the procedure.

The `callback` allows you to interact with the procedure without having to look at or modify its internal logic.

___

### Where are callbacks used?

They are used widely throughout JavaScript including:

- iterative `Array` methods
- DOM events
- asynchronous tasks
- `Promises`

Notes:

the details of how the upcoming examples work will be covered in later lessons

focus on how only the callback changes

discuss how they think it works just by looking at it

___

### Array Methods

> The `Array` method, `map()` transforms elements.

- `procedure` function: `map()`
- `callback` function: `doubleNumber()`, `halveNumber()`

```js
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const doubleNumber = number => number * 2;
const halveNumber = number => number / 2;

// the callback is invoked on each iteration
numbers.map(doubleNumber); // [2, 4, 6]
numbers.map(halveNumber); // [0.5, 1, 1.5]
```

Notes:

- which is the procedure and the callback
- what is being abstracted?
- what is being communicated (from and to)

___

### Asynchronous Tasks

<!-- CLARITY: the DB example is good, but there needs to be some information informing them about asynchronous tasks in general -->

The `callback` will be invoked whenever the DB returns the data rather than pausing to wait for it.

```js
const handleResult = (data) => {/*use the data*/}
db.findAll(handleResult);
// other code can execute without waiting
```

Notes:

- which is the procedure and the callback
- what is being abstracted?
- what is being communicated (from and to)

___

### Invoking

> Who invokes the `callback`?

- **You don't invoke** the `callback` function.
- The `procedure` function invokes it **when it is ready**.

Notes:

stress that you don't call the callback - the procedure does

---

## A Loop Procedure

<!-- DISCUSS: is this too far?
this is how i usually teach it in a demo
but this is really showing how to write the procedure moreso than how the callback is used

is there a better way of illustrating it or this ok to leave?
-->

> Consider the abstraction of a loop procedure.

In this form the loop is fixed to a single use case:

```js
for(let i = 0; i < 2; ++i) {
  console.log('hello!')
}
```

```sh
hello!
hello!
```

___

> Our goal.

We aim to abstract the loop and what goes on inside it:

```js
// our callback to be executed in each iteration
const printHello = () => console.log("hello!");
// configure the procedure with iterations count and callback
loop(2, printHello)
```

```sh
hello!
hello!
```

___

> Abstract the loop to a `procedure` function.

First we abstract setting its `iterations` count:

```js
const loop = (iterations) => {
  for(let i = 0; i < iterations; ++i) {
    // the iteration logic is still hard-coded
    console.log('hello!');
  }
}
```

___

> Add a `callback` parameter to the `procedure`.

Next we abstract the iteration logic using a `callback`:

```js
const loop = (iterations, callback) => {
  for(let i = 0; i < iterations; ++i) {
    // the procedure will always loop and invoke the callback
    callback();
  }
}
```

___

> Using the `procedure`.

Now we can configure the `procedure` without modifying its internal logic.

Rather than setting up a loop for each use case we use the abstraction:

```js
// the callback can do anything we'd like
const printHello = () => console.log('hello!');
const printGoodbye = () => console.log('goodbye!');
// the internals are abstracted behind a simple name
loop(2, printHello);
loop(3, printGoodbye);
```

```sh
# output
hello!
hello!
goodbye!
goodbye!
goodbye!
```

---

## Communication

The `callback` acts as the bridge for communication:

- `procedure`: communicates through arguments to the `callback`
- `callback`: communicates through a `return` value to the `procedure`

___

### From `procedure` to `callback`

> Sending information **out of the** `procedure`.

The `procedure` **communicates out** through the `callback`:

```js
const loop = (iterations, callback) => {
  for(let i = 0; i < iterations; ++i) {
    // update the procedure to provide the iteration count
    callback(i);
  }
}
```

___

```js
// update our callback to accept an iteration parameter
const printIteration = (iteration) =>
  console.log('the loop is on iteration:', iteration);

loop(4, printIteration);
```

```sh
the loop is on iteration: 0
the loop is on iteration: 1
the loop is on iteration: 2
the loop is on iteration: 3
```

___

### From `callback` to `procedure`

> Sending information **into the** `procedure`.

The output returned from the `callback` can be used by the `procedure`:

```js
// imagine we want the callback to break the loop on demand
const loop = (iterations, callback) => {
  for(let i = 0; i < iterations; ++i) {
    // update the procedure to accept an output from the callback
    const shouldBreak = callback(i);
    if (shouldBreak) break;
  }
}
```

Notes:

this is contrived for the sake of simplicity

later lessons using callbacks will better illustrate by not having to show the internal implementation of the procedure

---

## Higher Order Functions (HOF)

> The callback pattern is an example of a HOF.

A HOF is a function which meets one or both of:

- **receives a function as an argument**
- returns a function

___

> Procedure functions are *higher order* as they **receive the `callback` as an argument**.

Often the callback is defined in-line:

```js
procedure(() => { /*callback logic*/})
```

```js
loop(2, () => console.log('hello!'))
```

___

### Functional JavaScript

> The *functional* paradigm of JavaScript enables callbacks.

Recall that in JavaScript functions are first class:

- they can be defined anywhere
- they can be passed as arguments to a function
- they can be returned from a function

Notes:

JS is multi-paradigm.

it allows flexibility to match the right paradigm for the task from within the same domain

since ES6 there has been a greater community interest in functional programming with JS

HOF and other functional are commonly used beyond callbacks

___

> They are just functions!

The fundamental concepts of a function still apply to both the `callback` and `procedure`:

- What inputs (arguments) are received?
- What logic needs to be performed inside?
- What output is returned and how is it used?

---

## How are they used?

> General workflow.

After reading the documentation of the `procedure`:

1. Define your `callback` function.
2. Execute the `procedure` function by giving it a reference to your `callback`.
3. As part of the procedure it will invoke your callback.

___

> You define the callback.

The `procedure` documentation will describe the `callback` **signature**:

- What (if any) arguments the `callback` will receive.
- What (if any) output returned from the `callback` it expects.

```js
const callback = (arg, ...) => {/* callback logic */}
```

Notes:

remind them what a signature is if needed

___

> You invoke the procedure giving it your callback.

The `procedure` may have other arguments in addition to the `callback`:

```js
const callback = (arg, ...) => {/* callback logic */}

procedure(arg, callback)
```

___

> As part of the procedure it will invoke your callback.

The `procedure` documentation will describe:

- When it will invoke your `callback`.
- How it may use the return value of the `callback`.

---

## Responsibilities

> *Typically* you will neither write or look into the `procedure` itself.

In most cases you will only be responsible for:

- Writing the `callback`.
- Calling the `procedure` and providing it the `callback` as an argument.

___

### Procedure Responsibilities

> When documenting a `procedure`:

- When the `callback` will be executed.
- What arguments (if any) are given to the `callback`.
- What effect (if any) the callback return value has on the procedure.

___

### Callback Responsibilities

> When writing your `callback`.

- What arguments (if any) given by the `procedure` will be used.
- What output the `callback` should return.
