---
# TODO: set slide name
title: "Testing Fundamentals"
date: 2021-02-05T19:54:14Z
summary: "Introduction to manual and automated testing"
categories: ["slides"]
# TODO: add/remove tags before committing
tags: ["testing"]
---

{{< slides >}}
<!-- .slide: data-background="#ff0000" -->
## Testing Code

---

## Testing

> Testing is the process of determining that your source code behaves the way you expect.

___

## Approaches

- Manual testing
- Automated testing

---

## Manual Testing

> Manually execute your code with a **given input** and compare the result to an **expected output**

___

Provides a tangible feel for **overall** behavior

Typically performed by a QA (Quality Assurance) team

> Manually testing individual units of code has some downsides

___

### Downsides

- Time consuming
- Error prone 
- Tedious

---

## Automated Testing

> Code that tests your code!

Instead of manually entering inputs and manually comparing them against expected outputs **testing code** performs this check automatically!

___

## Additional Benefits of Automated Testing

- fast
- repeatable
- deterministic

---

## Many Forms of Automated Testing

___

### Unit Testing

> Testing **individual units** of code

___

### Integration Testing (code)

> Testing how multiple units **integrate with each other**
___

### End-to-end Testing (user)

> Testing the **functionality** of an application

Simulates user/consumer interactions with the application

___

## Exploring Automated Testing

> We will cover

- Unit testing
- Integration testing

---

## Testing Framework

> A library that provides a process and structure that serve the purpose of writing automated tests.

There are many testing frameworks, some are built into a programming language's standard library and others are third party libraries.

---

## Test Coverage

> The amount of source code that is tested by automated tests.

The greater the test coverage the more confident a development team can be in their source code.

___

## Calculating Test Coverage

You can calculate test coverage by dividing the total lines of source code by the number of lines of source code that have automated tests.

For example if you have 100 lines of source code and you have written tests that take into consideration 50 lines you have 50% test coverage.

---

## Assertion Statements

> A statement that gauges the correctness of a given assumption.

We expect the value **X** when part of our code executes. 

An assertion statement runs our source code to calculate the actual value and lets the developer know if the assumption was correct.

___

## Assertion Values

In assertion statements you have two values an expected value and an actual value.

The **expected value** is what we want to happen given the requirements of our code.

The **actual value** is what actually happened when the source code was run.

Notes:

instructor notes below (not displayed in slides)

{{< /slides >}}