---
title: "JavaScript: Introduction"
date: 2021-02-26T19:44:46Z
summary: ""
categories: ["slides", "javascript"]
type: "slides"
tags: ["introduction", "fundamentals"]
weight: 1
---

<!-- 
TIMELOG: 
2:30pm - 3:40pm -> first pass (70)

first pass total: 70 minutes
 -->

## JavaScript Introduction

---

## JavaScript

> JavaScript is an **interpreted** and **dynamically typed** programming language.

It uses a C-based syntax similar to Java, C# or Go.

___

### Multi-Paradigm

> JavaScript is a multi-paradigm language.

This allows flexibility to adapt the right paradigm for the task at hand:

- Object-Oriented programming
- Functional programming

---

## Origin

> JavaScript was originally created to allow for interactive websites.

JavaScript's original runtime environment was in a web browser.

This is known as client-side scripting.

---

## Node.js

> `Node.js` is a runtime for executing JavaScript **outside of a browser**.

JavaScript has since progressed from its original objective of handling *just* client-side scripting.

___

### Node.js Uses

`Node.js` can be used for many things including:

- creating web application servers
- creating web API services
- creating CLI applications

<!-- DISCUSS: should we have a slide(s) comparing the similarities/differences between browser and nodejs?
similar: core language
differences: browser (DOM, fetch etc) vs nodeJS APIs (fs, http etc)
-->

---

## EcmaScript

> EcmaScript is the core JavaScript standard for implementing the JavaScript language.

In version ES6 (EcmaScript 2015) JavaScript experienced a major revision adding many features and conveniences to the language.

For more information about [EcmaScript](https://www.ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/)

___

### Similarities

> Both the browser and `Node.js` runtimes for JavaScript align with EcmaScript.

The standard syntax of the language can be used in both environments.

___

### Differences

> Each runtime environment has APIs specific to its use case.

Some examples of features **only available** in each environment:

- browser APIs: DOM, client-side requests with `fetch`
- `Node.js` APIs: file system access, HTTP server

---

## Where To Learn

<!-- IDEA: should these be the end cap of the intro slides or in the LOs? -->

> Best resources for learning the inner workings of JavaScript:

- [Mozilla Developer Network (MDN)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/)
- [JavaScript.info](https://javascript.info)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/)
