---
title: "JavaScript: Data Types & Variables"
date: 2021-02-26T19:44:46Z
summary: ""
categories: ["slides", "javascript"]
type: "slides"
tags: ["variables", "data types", "fundamentals"]
weight: 2
---

## JavaScript Fundamentals

### Data Types & Variables

---

## Data Types

> JavaScript uses both primitive and reference data types.

---

## Primitives

> All primitives are **immutable**.

The main primitives you will work with:

- `Boolean`: lowercase `true` and `false`
- `Number`: integers, floating point numbers
- `String`: single or multi-character sequences (`""`, `''`)
- `null`: the absence of a value
- `undefined`: a value that has not been assigned

Notes:

Each of these include a primitive wrapper class for converting to and from object types
___

## Null & Undefined

> Both `null` and `undefined` imply the absence of a value.

How they are used can improve readability and clarity in debugging:

- `null`: Assigned **by the developer** to signify absence.
- `undefined`: Assigned **by the interpreter** to signify absence.

Notes:

highlight importance of sticking with this convention

---

## Objects

> All Objects in JavaScript are reference types.

JavaScript objects are **mutable** and include:

- functions
- data structures
- custom objects (may be made immutable)

___

### Data Structures

> Common data structure types you will work with:

- `Array`: indefinitely sized list, `[]`
- `Object` literal: key-value map, `{ key: value }`

```js
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const dog = { name: "Dutch", age: 11 };
```

---

## Variables

> Due to dynamic typing the data type does not need to be defined during declaration.

There are two ways to declare variables in JavaScript:

- `let`: for **re-assignable** variables
- `const`: for *constant* variables that **cannot be reassigned**

Notes:

the function keyword is also used but only for function declarations

___

### Re-assignable Variables

> The keyword `let` allows us to declare a variable **that can be reassigned**.

With `let` a variable can be:

- declared
- declared & assigned
- re-assigned later

```js
let x; // declare without assigning (value: undefined)
let y = 5; // declare and assign (value: 5)
x = "hello"; // assign an existing variable (value: "hello")
y = false; // re-assign an existing variable (value: false)
```

Notes:

Because `let` allows a variable name to have its value reassigned it should be used sparingly to improve readability and avoid bugs

___

### Constant Variables

> The keyword `const` allows us to declare a variable **that cannot be reassigned**.

A `const`(ant) variable is one that:

- Must be assigned on declaration.
- Can not be changed (re-assigned) later.

```js
const x = 15; // declare and assign (value: 15)
x = "hello"; // runtime error (re-assigning a const)
const y; // runtime error (declare without assignment)
```

Notes:

because they are constant they are used more often (contrast with notes on let)

___

### Mutability

> Mutability is determined by data type not declaration syntax.

A mutable data type **can be mutated** even if declared as a `const`. Such as changes to:

- the elements in an `Array`
- the properties of an `Object` literal

```js
const arr = [];
arr.push(1);
const obj = { key: "value" };
obj.key = "new value";
```

---

## Scope

> In a single script document there are two scopes:

- **global**: The scope of any variables declared top-level.
- **local**: The scope of any variables declared within a **block**.

Notes:

later when working with multiple script files we will explore a third (module scope)

___

### Blocks

> Any self-contained region.

Blocks are visually identifiable by their surrounding curly-braces (`{}`):

```js
// in global scope (not part of any block)

for(...) {
  // inside the loop block
}

function myFunc() {
  // inside the myFunc block
  if (condition) {
    // inside the if statement block
  }
}
```

Notes:

some exceptions such as shorthand if statements and loops that are defined without curlies

most linters will shame you for the shorthand syntax though due to its effect on consistency and readability

___

### Block-scoping

> Both `let` and `const` enforce block-scoping.

- You cannot re-declare a variable name in the same scope.
- Variables in local blocks take precedence over higher scoped variables.

___

```js
const x = 5; // global x
console.log(x); // 5 (highest scope)

// this would cause a runtime error (re-declaring in same scope)
// const x = 10; 

function myFunc() {
  const x = 10; // local x within myFunc block
  console.log(x); // 10 (local precedence over global x)
  
  if (condition) {
    const x = "hello"; // local x within if statement block
    console.log(x); // "hello" (local precedence over myFunc x)
  }
}
```

Notes:

The original variable keyword, `var`, was not block-scoped and led to non-intuitive behavior due to hoisting
