---
title: "JavaScript: Type Coercion"
date: 2021-02-26T19:44:46Z
summary: ""
categories: ["slides", "javascript"]
type: "slides"
tags: ["fundamentals", "type coercion"]
weight: 7
---

## Programming Fundamentals

### Type Coercion

---

### Type Coercion

> Type coercion is the **implicit conversion** between data types.

The interpreter *implicitly* converts values in these scenarios:

- truthy falsy
- loose and strict equality

___

#### Type Conversion

As a developer you may manually convert between data types, known simply as *type conversion*:

```js
const numberAsString = "10.5"
const number = parseFloat("10.5");
```

___

#### Why Type Coercion?

> The JavaScript interpreter is designed to avoid crashing.

Across the browser engines (HTML, CSS, and JavaScript) the common theme is trying to correct any malformed or ambiguous syntax to **prevent the site from crashing**.

The JavaScript interpreter works behind the scenes using type coercion and other corrective techniques to keep the single thread from crashing.

___

#### Only the Interpreter Knows

> Type coercion **only converts internally**.

When the context requires it a type conversion is initiated by the interpreter.

This *does not effect* the underlying type of the original value.

---

### Truthy & Falsy

> Treating values as true-like or false-like.

The interpreter will use type coercion when encountering a conditional statement that is not a boolean value or expression.

___

> All conditional expressions *must* be resolved to a boolean representation of true or false.

When a non-boolean value is encountered the interpreter will treat the value as truthy or falsy.

It is easier to categorize the **falsy** values because all other values are considered **truthy**.

___

#### Falsy Values

- `false`
- `0`
- `""`
- `null`
- `undefined`
- `NaN`

If the value was not on this list it is considered truthy.

___

> conditional statement evaluation examples:

```js

let name;
if (name) { // falsy
  // this block will not execute because name is undefined
}

name = "";
if (name) { // falsy
  // this block will not execute because name is empty
}

name = "Bernie";
if (name) { // truthy
  // this block will execute because name is defined and not empty
}

const dog = {name: "Bernie", age: 5};
if (dog) { // truthy
  // this block executes because dog is defined
}

```

---

### Loose vs Strict Equality

> Comparisons based on value or type and value.

- loose equality: uses type coercion during comparison
- strict equality: no type coercion during comparison

___

### Loose Equality is forgiving

> The types are coerced so they don't have to be the same.

- In loose equality only the values need to match.
- In strict equality **both the types and the values** must match.

You should **always** reach for strict equality to avoid unexpected behavior.

___

#### Loose vs Strict Equality Examples

loose equality:

```js
5 == 5 // no type conversion necessary and values are the same: return true
5 == "5" // convert types to the same and compare values: return true
```

strict equality:

```js
5 === 5 // same types, compare values return true
5 === "5" // different types return false
```
