---
title: "Introduction to Web Integration Testing"
date: 2021-02-11T18:34:35Z
summary: ""
weight: 1
type: "slides"
categories: ["slides"]
tags: ["integration-testing"]
---

<!-- 
title slide (h1): #
other slides (h2): ##

!! prefer using multiple vertical slides over dense slides !!

vertical slides to expand on the concept
vertical separator: ___

horizontal slides to separate concepts
horizontal separator: ---
-->

## Integration Testing

---

## A Layered Approach to Testing

> Incrementally build test coverage from the innermost units to the overall application.

After unit testing you want to test how the broader pieces of the application *integrate* with each other.

---

## Unit vs Integration Testing

> Are you simulating or testing interactions?

___

### Unit Testing Review

> Control everything but the unit under test

In unit tests you focus on the **innermost** functions and methods that:

- have no external interactions, just simple input and output
- have dependency on external interactions that are **stubbed** or **mocked**

Notes:

<!-- IDEA: out of scope but important to distinguish unit vs integration

should these be slides or just teacher notes?
 -->

- stub: a placeholder that is needed to execute but not relevant to the test
- mock: a simulation of how a dependency is expected to be consumed or behave relative to the unit under test
  - test that it is called properly
  - pre-define its expected output or behavior when used

---

## What is **Integration Testing**?

> Verifying how two or more **components** of a **system** interact with each other.

Applications, whether web-based or otherwise, inherently span further than individual functions and methods.

---

## Integration Testing

> Simulate realistic usage.

In integration tests you want to test the *real interactions* between components and **should rarely if ever mock them**.

___

> Only mock what will later be tested.

Confidence in a system is proportional to **how realistic** the test coverage is.

---

## Web Integration Testing

> Testing the behavior of **Components** in a web **System**.

---

## Units, Components & Systems

___

<!-- TOOD: missing image -->

> BOX DIAGRAM IMAGE
___

## System

> The overall application made up of **components**.

- **Front end**: user interface logic
- **Back end**: programmatic interface logic

___

## Component

> A grouping (module or class) of **units** that serve a common responsibility.

Components are inherently more complex than the individual units within them:

- front end: UI components like a form or interactive widget
- back end: HTTP controller, database model

___

## Unit

> The individual functions or methods.

- parts of a broader component
- individual utility tools

---

## Our focus

Integration testing on the back end.

> The **system** made up of the controller and model layers:

- database interactions: CRUD behavior with models
- HTTP interactions: request and response behavior of controllers
