---
title: "Integration Testing Quiz"
date: 2021-02-11T18:34:35Z
summary: ""
weight: 4
categories: ["quizzes"]
tags: ["integration-testing"]
---

## Which is the appropriate testing approach?

> A `convertErrors()` controller *utility* method designed to convert errors into a shape that is more consumable by the client.

<!-- 1 -->

1. Unit test
2. Integration test

> A `getUsers()` controller method for handling requests to the `GET /users` endpoint.

<!-- 2 -->

1. Unit test
2. Integration test

> A `findUsersByLastName()` *custom query* repository method.

<!-- 2 -->

1. Unit test
2. Integration test

> The User and Project models are associated in a one-to-many relationship. An `addProject()` method on the User model that saves an associated Project.

<!-- 2 -->

1. Unit test
2. Integration test

## Testing state

> It is a best practice to have tests rely on a testing state produced from previous tests in the suite.

<!-- false -->

1. true
2. false

> If tests utilize a shared testing state the order in which they are run may impact the results.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

> When tests produce consistent results regardless of the order they are run in we call these tests:

<!-- idempotent -->

1. integration tests
2. idempotent tests
3. regression tests
4. independent tests

> The setup of a test is designed to establish the initial state of a test.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

> The teardown of a test is designed to revert any changes that were made during a test.

<!-- true -->

1. true
2. false

## Web Integration Tests

> The two types of assertions used in web integration tests are (select 2)?

- HTTP assertions
- client interaction assertions
- database assertions
- documentation assertions

> HTTP assertions in an integration test may verify (select all that apply)?

<!-- 
- response status code
- response headers
- response body
-->

- request headers
- request status code
- response status code
- response headers
- request body
- response body

> Database assertions in an integration test may verify (select all that apply)?

- row counts (for creates and deletes)


> When performing an integration test that *updates existing data* it is important to assert this change in the database?

<!-- true -->

- true
- false

> Testing utilities can be used to provide (select all that apply)?

- known constant values
- methods for setting up a known testing state
- methods for creating objects common to more than one test
